RFC: OPA integration proposal. (#41)
concourse/rfcs: 041-opa-integration/proposal.md

# Summary

This proposal outlines the beginnings of support for policy enforcement. OPA 
(Open Policy Agent) will be used as the first policy manager to integrate with.

# Motivation

Generally speaking, anything that exposes an HTTP API (whether an individual 
micro-service or an application as a whole) needs to control who can run those 
APIs and when. 

Concourse, as a CI platform, also needs to control who can do something and when,
which can be done by integrating with a policy manager. Before any action, send
a policy check request, with data that describes the action, to the policy manager,
and only continue if the policy manager replies a "pass".

Possible policies to apply could be:

* Steps, e.g. code security scan, by certain resource types must be done.
* Some team's tasks must be run with certain tag.
* Some docker image registries are not allowed.
* Some docker images are not not allowed.
* and so on ...

# Proposal

## Support multiple policy managers

Like how multiple credential managers are supported, Concourse should allow other

> policy managers than OPA.

Reviewer: This sounds reasonable, but I think the RFC should show how this would work or leave it as an open question.

Author: Added a description.

## Policy check points

> * All API calls, for example `set-pipeline`, will also go through policy checks.

Reviewer: What happens when an API request is rejected by the policy manager? Does the API return a certain response (status code or body)?

Author: Http code 403 (forbidden) should be returned.

> * Because Concourse supports task file, and task file is only fetched at runtime.

Reviewer: What happens when a task step is rejected by the policy manager? Does the step error with a message?

Author: Sorry for late update. I have changed `RunTask` to `UsingImage` in the implementation. Just updated the RFC. If `UsingImage` doesn't pass policy check, it should return an error `PolicyCheckNotPass` from function `Run` of step `check/get/put/task`.

The action `set-pipeline` has no access to task files. To support policy check 
against tasks, a policy check should be invoked before a task run starts.

## OPA configuration

> * CONCOURSE_OPA_URL - URL of OPA service including path

Reviewer: Do you see this as something that should only be configured cluster-wide? Or would it make sense to you to have this configured on a per-team basis?

Author: For our use cases, we don't need per-team OPA. If a team/pipeline wants to use their own OPA, an OPA resource type can be used.

* `team`: team name.
* `pipeline`: pipeline name. Some action is not against a pipeline, then this field 
can be omitted.
* `data`: For API actions, `data` should carry data from the API call; for `RunTask`
action, data is the task configuration.

For example, a policy check request against `set_pipeline` looks like:

```json
{
  "input": {
    "service": "concourse",
    "cluster_name": "some-cluster",
    "cluster_version": "5.7.0",
    "user": "some-user",
    "team": "some-team",
    "pipeline": "some-pipeline",
    "action": "SetPipeline",
    "data": {
      "groups": [  ],
      "resource_types": [  ],
      "resources": [  ],
      "jobs": [  ]
    }
  }
}
```

## Policy check switches

If no policy manager is configured, then policy check is switched off.

When a policy manager is configured, Concourse intends to use "explicit" strategy
to decide which actions should run policy checks, meaning that, without defining
policy check filters, no action will run policy check.

Users may not want to run policy check against all actions. For example, Concourse
generate large amount of `ListAllPipelines`, and it makes not much sense to check
it.

> It's assumable that users more tends to check policy against write actions than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users will tend to check with the policy manager for write actions rather than
```

> read-only actions. As all actions expect `RunTask` are invoked from HTTP, we 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
read-only actions. As all actions except `RunTask` are invoked from HTTP, we 
```

can provide a filter, `policy-check-filter-http-methods`, to specify HTTP 
methods via which actions are invoked. To skip read-only action for policy 
check, users may set `POST,PUT,DELETE` to the filter `policy-check-filter-http-
methods`, so that `GET` actions will not go through policy check.

User also may specifically want to or don't want to do run policy check against
certain actions. For example, a cluster will want to check policy against only
`SetPipeline`, or the other cluster don't want to check policy against `RunTask`,
for which two more filters, `policy-check-filter-action` and `policy-check-
filter-action-skip` are supported. If an action is defined in action list, then 
the action will always go through policy check, vice versa for action-skip list. 

In summary, where are three policy check filters:

> * `policy-check-filter-http-methods`: defines HTTP methods of actions that

Reviewer: Since flags for list values are passed multiple times, one for each value, the flag name should be singular.

```suggestion
* `policy-check-filter-http-method`: defines HTTP methods of actions that
```

# Motivation

Generally speaking, anything that exposes an HTTP API (whether an individual 
micro-service or an application as a whole) needs to control who can run those 
APIs and when. 

Concourse, as a CI platform, also needs to control who can do something and when,
which can be done by integrating with a policy manager. Before any action, send
a policy check request, with data that describes the action, to the policy manager,
and only continue if the policy manager replies a "pass".

Possible policies to apply could be:

* Steps, e.g. code security scan, by certain resource types must be done.
* Some team's tasks must be run with certain tag.
* Some docker image registries are not allowed.
* Some docker images are not not allowed.
* and so on ...

# Proposal

## Support multiple policy managers

Like how multiple credential managers are supported, Concourse should allow other
policy managers than OPA. Thus an interface of `PolicyCheck` should be defined, and
OPA is one of the implementations.

## Policy check points

* All API calls, for example `set-pipeline`, will also go through policy checks. If
the check doesn't pass, API should return HTTP code 403 (forbidden).

> * `UsingImage` action will be sent to OPA before Concourse launches a container in

Reviewer 2: I can also imagine wanting to prevent the use of `privileged: true` for tasks (perhaps even on a per-team basis), which also feels like it should be handled as some `PolicyCheck` (and probably OPA?).

This makes me wonder: are there any other things besides images (and `privileged`) that operators would be interested in checking against OPA? The answer may just be no, but for arguments sake, what if Concourse didn't try to be opinionated about what actions to check against, and instead supported 4 actions beyond to the API actions: `Check`, `Get`, `Put`, and `Task`. Each action's `data` was the entire step definition.

Granted, this would mean that if all you cared about was the image used, you'd need 4 identical policy check definitions - but, by it's nature, this also affords operators more flexibility in what kind of checks they perform. This may be overkill depending on the use cases in practice, though. However, it does feel more similar to the approach taken for API endpoints (being unopinionated and sending the entire body of the API call).

`check/get/put/task` steps. If the check doesn't pass, the step should return an error
indicating policy check not pass.

## OPA configuration

* CONCOURSE_OPA_URL - URL of OPA service including path

For example, OPA_URL is `http://opa.mycompany.com/v1/data/concourse/policy`, a OPA 
policy check request will look like:

```
POST http://opa.mycompany.com/v1/data/concourse/policy
{
   "input": {
      ...
   }
}
```

## Policy check input data

Policy check input data should include common metadata and action specific data. 
In principle, Concourse should send as much data as possible to the policy engine.

Common metadata include:

* `service`: should be always "concourse". This will allow Concourse specific 
policies to to configured in the policy engine.
* `cluster_name`: cluster name.
* `cluster_version`: Concourse version
* `action`: Action name. This follows same action names used in RBAC, plus an extra
action `UsingImage`.
* `http_method`: HTTP method of the action, for `UsingImage`, this field absents.
* `user`: username who invokes the action.
* `team`: team name.
* `pipeline`: pipeline name. Some action is not against a pipeline, then this field 
can be omitted.

> * `data`: For API actions, `data` should carry data from the API call; for `UsingImage`

Reviewer: It's probably worth noting here *what* data gets sent during `UsingImage` - we've gone through a few iterations in https://github.com/concourse/concourse/pull/5034

In particular it's probably worth mentioning how credentials are handled, and the potential risk of transmitting them if a credential manager is not used or if secret redaction is not enabled.

Author: Added a note for image_source redaction.

(Open Policy Agent) will be used as the first policy manager to integrate with.

# Motivation

Generally speaking, anything that exposes an HTTP API (whether an individual 
micro-service or an application as a whole) needs to control who can run those 
APIs and when. 

Concourse, as a CI platform, also needs to control who can do something and when,
which can be done by integrating with a policy manager. Before any action, send
a policy check request, with data that describes the action, to the policy manager,
and only continue if the policy manager replies a "pass".

Possible policies to apply could be:

* Steps, e.g. code security scan, by certain resource types must be done.
* Some team's tasks must be run with certain tag.
* Some docker image registries are not allowed.
* Some docker images are not not allowed.
* and so on ...

# Proposal

## Support multiple policy managers

Like how multiple credential managers are supported, Concourse should allow other
policy managers than OPA.

## Policy check points

* Concourse has implemented the audit function. Each action, e.g. `set-pipeline`, 
generates an audit log. Policy checks can be done right before writing audit logs.

> So that all actions that are audited will also go through policy checks.

Reviewer 3: It seems to me that this RFC has a pre-requisite that Concourse first expand the simplistic auditing capabilities that were added in 5.2 - documenting explicitly what is audited, a JSON schema of generated audit logs, etc.

Currently, auditing is configured through boolean environment variables. Maybe this should be changed? What if a policy requires an audit which is not enabled through the environment variables - should the action automatically be denied or permitted, should it be impossible to apply the policy to begin with?

It seems to me that there should first be an RFC on maturing auditing before putting work in on policy engines.

Author: Thanks for the comment and sorry for the confusion. The policy check doesn't depend on audit at all. Let me fix the wording.
